---
id: 6660
title: Omeka!
date: 2014-02-20T02:09:00+00:00
author: admin
layout: post
guid: http://emilyesten.com/words/uncategorized/omeka/
permalink: /highlights/omeka/
tumblr_sheishistoric_id:
  - "77233119431"
  - "77233119431"
tumblr_sheishistoric_permalink:
  - http://sheishistoric.tumblr.com/post/77233119431/omeka
  - http://sheishistoric.tumblr.com/post/77233119431/omeka
original_post_id:
  - "6660"
  - "6660"
categories:
  - Highlights
tags:
  - chc
  - dh
  - digital humanities
  - eric poehler
  - hons 391a
  - hons391a
  - omeka
  - umass amherst
---
So now that my digital humanities class is in full swing, each &ldquo;team&rdquo; has to make a presentation about the software they are using. (I put team in quotation marks because not every team is made up of multiple people &#8211; a few of the programs are run by just one person, like me!) This week, I presented first! Here&rsquo;s a transcript of what I talked about. 

<!-- more -->

> Hi everyone! My name is Emily, and I’m on the Omeka team for our chapel project. I chose to work with Omeka because as I did a lot of reading about digital humanities and talked with twitterstorians,  Omeka was one program that kept coming up. It seemed like this essential, basic tool that I just had to learn more about if I wanted to investigate the field. 
> 
> According to the Omeka website, Omeka is a Swahili word meaning to display or lay out wares; to speak out; to spread out; to unpack. Those definitions have very different implications, and Omeka meets all of them.
> 
> At a first glance, Omeka sounds like a digital museum – it has “exhibits” and “collections.” And in some ways, that’s exactly what Omeka is. It’s a software combination that uses web content management, collections management, and archival digital collections systems. That sounds like a lot, right?
> 
> When I asked on Twitter, here are some of the definitions I received:
> 
> Patrick Murray-John (Omeka dev team manager): Web publishing for people who love them some metadata.
> 
> Michelle Kassorla (Digital Humanist): Omeka is an open source archival-quality digital curation tool. It’s built to archive standards so that data can be read in the future.
> 
> Website: “Omeka is a software tool that enables you to create dynamic online exhibits that showcase collections of digital images, text, and other multi-media formats in one seamless site.” It’s great for realistically anyone – scholars wanting to share primary source collections or dissertation, museum professionals who want to show sensitive materials, librarians to show off an online catalog, educators, enthusiasts, or archivists!
> 
> For us, it’s a great tool to organize and display the documents or artifacts we find about the Old Chapel! Specifically, it allows us to display these items, tell a story with these items, and preserve complete information (just like we did with the metadata team last week!)
> 
> Omeka organizes content in two ways: Items and Collections. They’re fairly self-explanatory – items are individual files, while collections are grouped items. You can have sections (equivalent to a museum room) and pages (equivalent to the walls of a room.)
> 
> Here are some cool examples of what our Omeka site could look like:
> 
> <a href="http://silveragecomics.omeka.net" target="_blank">http://silveragecomics.omeka.net</a>
> 
> <a href="http://tmsarchives.omeka.net/collections" target="_blank">http://tmsarchives.omeka.net/collections</a>
> 
> This is what our class page CURRENTLY looks like: 
> 
> <a href="http://honors391spr2014.omeka.net" target="_blank">http://honors391spr2014.omeka.net</a>